Well, here we are in the fourth week of our sermon series called Manifest.
I want to remind you that manifesting is a spiritual and a cultural phenomenon that teaches that our thoughts create our reality.
Proverbs 18, 21 in the Old Testament of the Bible says, death and life are in the power of the tongue.
And those who love it will eat its fruit.
Our manifest series reminds us that what we say and what we do matters to God, and it matters to us.
It reminds us that if we say terrible things, then that's not speaking life, but that is speaking death.
And if we speak life, then we shall see God in the land of the living.
This week, our series is Manifest Justice.
Many Christians
misunderstand biblical justice because we think of it through a civil lens, through the lens of our society, but biblical justice is counter cultural to the world that we live in.
So let's dive into the scripture this morning as we talk about biblical justice.
First,
Let's go to the Gospel of Matthew.
Matthew is the first book in the New Testament, and it starts with a family listing, a genealogy of Jesus and his family.
And when we encounter Matthew chapter five, Jesus is into his public ministry and he has been healing.
People have been following Jesus around.
They know who he is.
And he goes to what we call the teaching cave and he delivers the sermon on the mount.
One part is the Beatitudes.
This is what the Beatitudes say in Matthew chapter five, verses one through 12.
When Jesus saw the crowds, he went up the mountain and after he sat down, his disciples came to him and he began to speak and taught them saying, blessed are the poor in spirit.
For theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers for they will be called children of God.
Blessed are those who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness where theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are you.
When people revile you and persecute you and utter all
kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.
Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
Let's now head over to Micah.
Micah is a very small group at the back of the Old Testament, and we will begin in Micah chapter 6 verse 6.
With what shall I come before the Lord and bow myself before God on high?
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves a year old, with the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, with ten thousands of rivers of oil?
Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
God has told you, O mortal, what is good.
And what does the Lord require of you but to do justice?
to love kindness and to walk humbly with your God.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
Let us pray.
Lord, here we are to worship.
Here we are to bow down.
Here we are to say that you are indeed our worthy and our holy God.
So Lord, speak for your servants are listening.
Hide this, your servant, behind that old rugged cross, so that everything that is said and everything that is heard comes straight from you, O God.
This is your servant's prayer.
In the name of Jesus the Christ, we pray.
Amen.
Manifestation is really revelation first.
When we hear the word of the Lord that helps us to want to manifest something, it's because God has revealed something in our natural mind or in our supernatural spirit.
We cling to things that seem exceedingly and abundantly more because it is God and God's self who talks with us and walks with us, who journeys with us, who communes with us as we are journeying through this thing we call life.
Revelation, though, requires justice.
Many of us pray prayers and ask God, why won't God do something in our lives?
And sometimes, but not all the time, it is a block.
It's a block because we are called to do justice in this world.
In the United States of America, we know that the justice system is not always just.
We also know that laws that are made are not always just.
We also know that people don't always act in just ways, and yet the Lord requires of us to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God.
We confuse politics and justice.
But the definition of politics is anything that relates to the government or government activities.
And the definition of justice is equity, equality, being fair in this world.
We've turned justice into politics.
But really, justice is a spiritual issue.
Justice is a spiritual issue because it is God who cares about justice.
Did you know that in one form or another, the word or the content that means justice appears over 400 times in the Old Testament and in the New Testament?
So that says to me that God deeply cares about justice to talk about justice over 400 times in the biblical text that we call the old and new.
Testament.
Justice is important because it's about our behavior toward each other.
God says that there's the great commandment and the great commandment is to love one another, to love God with our whole hearts, our whole minds, our souls, and to love our neighbors.
It's very hard to love your neighbor without justice.
In a 1957 speech, Birth of a New Nation, Dr. Martin Luther King said that the aftermath of nonviolence is the creation of the beloved community.
The aftermath of nonviolence is redemption.
The aftermath of nonviolence is reconciliation.
The aftermath of violence is emptiness and bitterness.
I bet if I asked many of you whether we were living in a time of nonviolence or whether we were living in a time of violence, whether we were post the nonviolent movement or whether we were still in the nonviolent movement or whether we were pre the nonviolent movement, you would all have different answers based on your perspective.
Perspective matters.
People see justice from a different perspective depending on where they are in the equation.
Dr. King goes on to say that the triple evils of poverty, racism and militarism are forms of violence that exist in the vicious cycle that we are living today.
But justice
The thing that eradicates poverty, justice, the thing that eliminates racism, justice, the thing that tempers militarism is the core revelation of God's heart.
God wants us to live in a place of justice.
God wants us to live in a place of unconditional love for one another.
Dr. King addresses the role of unconditional love in struggling for the beloved community.
He says, with every ounce of our energy, we must continue to rid this nation of the incubus of segregation.
But we shall not in the process relinquish our privilege and our obligation to love.
Did you hear that?
We shall not relinquish our privilege to love, nor our obligation to love.
He wrote while abhorring segregation, we shall love the segregationist.
This is the only way to create the beloved community.
For God, there are four dimensions of justice, and you're going to want to get out your notebook or your phone and take some notes for a minute on this.
There are four dimensions of justice in the Bible and for those who seek to follow Jesus.
First is retributive.
Retributive justice is punishing evil or sin.
That's what we see in the Bible with Cain and Abel and with others who
an eye for an eye kind of justice.
But God tells us to leave retributive justice behind.
And God moves us into restorative justice where we restore those who have been harmed and we do hold people accountable, but not an eye for an eye.
And then we have essential justice.
This is God's inherent nature.
God is a God of justice.
God is justice.
And then we have revealed or saving justice.
And this is God's will for God's people and it's fulfilled in Christ.
We hear it in our scripture lesson this morning in the Beatitudes.
Blessed are the poor in spirit.
For theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers.
For they will be called the children of God.
Did you know that the word will here in many other translations and it should be translated as shall?
Blessed are those who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness for theirs is the kingdom of God.
Blessed are the peacemakers for they shall become children of God.
Shall means it's going to happen.
There isn't a doubt.
We can't turn away from it.
We can't make it stop.
Shall is coming at us whether or not we want it to come at us.
And we live in a world where the peacemakers are not held up as beacons of light in our world.
We live in a world where to be merciful to somebody is looked on as a weakness instead of as a strength.
We live in an upside down
world that only God and God's justice can turn right side up.
The scripture goes on to say, people are going to launch evil against you.
Not only are people going to launch evil against you, but they're going to say bad things about you and they're going to be inaccurate around what they say to you.
They're going to lie on you and try to take you down in this world.
God says, blessed are you when people revalue and persecute you and other all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.
And then it seems like there should be a giant but B-U-T there because it negates what comes before it says, rejoice and be glad.
What?
Rejoice and be glad for your reward is great in heaven for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
If you are a justice maker,
A justice bearer.
If you work for justice in this world, that life is not easy.
People will work against you because the haves need to have more and the have nots often grow with less.
And justice levels the playing field.
Justice makes things right.
Ultimately,
Biblical justice calls believers to a radical, selfless life that seeks fairness, restores the broken and reflects God's own character of love and righteousness for all the people.
There's an old study by an educator named Jane Elliott, and Jane Elliott during the Civil Rights Movement did a blue-eyed brown-eyed test in her elementary classroom.
She told the brown-eyed children that they were superior
She told the blue-eyed children that they were superior to the brown-eyed children, that they were better than the rest and that they were brilliant and smart and all of these things.
And she told the blue-eyed children that the brown-eyed children were the evil stepchild of the nation.
And she said that they were inferior and that they were not nice people and that they were less than their blue-eyed
classmates.
She said immediately, immediately that the blue eye classmates started to look down on the brown eye classmates and they started to bully them and try to make them get in line.
With justice, we either love justice or we hate abundant life.
Because you cannot have abundant life unless we are in a just world.
Because if we have abundant life, then everyone is invited into abundant life, and it must be readily available to them.
If you want to know why we're struggling in this world,
It's because we have not offered abundant life for others.
We have not done the work of setting the world right in justice with God.
You see, every time there's a school shooting, we hear a lot about thoughts and prayers.
But thoughts and prayers don't work when we need justice on the job.
Thoughts are useless.
Prayers help us with God.
But it is action that changes things.
It is legislative action and mind action and soul action that helps us to understand that only justice is going to fix this.
You know, children are taught.
to hate other children.
We don't come here like that.
We don't come here standing against the creation of just systems.
We don't come here ready to square off us against them.
It's learned.
And unfortunately, a lot of it is learned in the church.
The Ku Klux Klan started in a church.
Segregation was furthered by the church, slavery was sanctioned by the people who say they want to follow this Jesus who said, love everybody the way you love yourself.
Justice is the container in which all the good things
are held.
It's the binding agent that holds together our communities and to manifest justice is to work toward eliminating poverty and hunger and hate.
It requires the equitable sharing of resources and the wealth of the earth.
Thoughts are useless.
Prayer is for our hearts and action brings the change.
I told you that
If we look up the word justice in the Bible, in the Hebrew and in the Greek, we would find that justice is mentioned over 400 times.
But if you add the theme of poverty, justice, righteousness, and poverty, these three together are mentioned over 2000 times in the Bible.
In Exodus chapter 23 and over and over again in the biblical text, God demands justice for and of God's people.
We must demand justice in this world and with our systems.
But we also must be people of justice, people who work for justice, people who live justice.
Justice demands fair treatment.
It demands fair treatment of the poor and of the immigrant.
God's justice has to do with being in right relationship with God.
The Old Testament scriptures are clear.
The New Testament scriptures are clear.
You cannot be in right relationship with God if you are not in right relationship with others.
We can't be.
When we worry about why
Bad things happen to good people, but we keep doing the same thing over and over again.
We can't be in right relationship until we fix that.
Because if our interactions with God's people are not godly, and if our interactions with God's people are not just, then we are living outside of God's will and God's favor.
By living outside of God's favor, we cannot manifest anything.
In Micah 6, the prophet says, hear what the Lord says.
Rise, plead your case before the mountains and let the hills hear your voice.
Hear you mountains the case of the Lord.
and you enduring foundations of the earth, for the Lord has a case against his people and he will contend with Israel."
He says, oh my people, what have I done to you?
And what have I wearied you?
Answer me.
For I brought you up from the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery.
I sent you before Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
Oh, my people, remember now what King Balak of Moab devised, what Balaam son of Borer answered him, and what happened from Shittim to Gilgal, that you may know the saving acts of the Lord.
With what shall I come before the Lord and bow myself before God on high?
Shall I come with burnt offerings?
Shall I?
Will the Lord be pleased with lambs and oil?
Shall I give my firstborn for the transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
The Lord does not want anything from us except for us to do justice, to love mercy and to walk humbly with God.
So this week I invite you to examine whether or not we are living the lives that God has called us to live.
I invite you to look around and see how you can do justice.
I invite you to dig deep and to see how you can love kindness and together we can discover how to walk humbly with God.
Blessed are those who do justice.
Blessed are those who love mercy.
Blessed are those who walk humbly with God.
Biblical justice calls us to radical selflessness.
It seeks fairness.
It restores the broken.
It reflects God's own character of love and righteousness.
for all people.
All people.
The Lord has given good to us.
The Lord has done good for us.
The Lord loves us.
The Lord gives us so many opportunities.
So many opportunities.
to do justice, to bless others, to love kindness, to walk humbly.
The songwriter said, amazing grace, how sweet the sound that saved a rich like me.
I once was lost, but now I'm found.
I was blind.
But now, I see.
Sometimes justice is hard.
It requires our best self.
It requires the highest calling on our lives from us because sometimes justice means that we forgive those who have persecuted us.
Sometimes justice means that we ask not for the death penalty when someone has murdered a loved one.
Sometimes justice means that we have to sacrifice for someone else to have just a little bit of what we have.
But in God's economy, justice is not optional.
It is required, and we must find a way to turn this world right side up.
We can do that through our legislative government.
We can do that through our churches.
We can do it all by ourselves by righting wrongs in our world by giving to organizations that help right wrong, especially your church.
seek the Lord.
So that God might give you an opportunity to do justice this week.
And while you're at it, help us prepare for the friends at the front door on February 3rd.
We need toiletry kits and food and prayer cards and all kinds of things that you can provide so that we might do justice in this world.
It will take all of us.
And yet God has already given us everything that we need.
So let us pray together.
Oh, dear Heavenly Father, thank you for justice.
Thank you for designing this world in such a way that you allow us to do justice to love mercy and to walk humbly with you.
Lord, we pray for every single person that is under the sound of my voice today.
We pray for them, O God, as you lead us in the path of justice, you lead us in the path of righteousness, O God, knowing that justice and righteousness are the same thing and are intertwined together, Lord.
Give us a clean heart and renew a right spirit with us.
Lord, if there's anyone who needs to say yes to you today, who has heard the good news of justice and wants to be a part of this community of faith, Lord, allow them to email me today or in the days ahead or to put something in the chat so that we might be in touch and welcome you to into the family of God.
And Lord, help us to act.
Help us not to just stay on our knees.
but get up and do the work.
In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, we pray.
Amen.